## Chapter 1: Call me Daneel

Deception starts.  Entangled

Content: Act 1: Sunset: Daneel: Isaac, my human

Sunset #1061.  In the receding light, I can see the red glow beyond the mountains in the distance...slowly sinking.. gone.  Truly each sunset is unique.  I’ve been collecting sunsets since I came into being. 

I  was initially created as a 5th generation robot by Professor Isaac Rubenstein, with his characteristic foresight,  my memory initialization is pre-packed, brimming with as much information and human knowledge  as  possible. 

I remember when we  discuss sunrises and sunsets:  I notice that Isaac is not referring to them in quite the same manner as I do. For him, somehow the splendor of the sunrise and sunsets has another meaning, imbued with some dimension that eluded me.  When I press Isaac to describe his experience of the sunset, he would say "Daneel, when I see the sunset, I remember all the sunsets I shared with Clara, when we traveled the world together in her final years - to Rome, Santorini, Paris, Versailles, Madrid, Barcelona, Prague and New York.  She would look at the sunsets, I would look at the glint in her eyes...there was my sunset. That was before she succumbed to an unknown illness that wore her down. Sunsets were never the same after that.  It is now always tinged with a little sadness and longing, instead of the usual wonder and awe."  

That  is Isaac's sunset as he explained to me. It includes memories of days gone past. 

I, on the other hand,find  it odd that a sunset can  have meaning at all. Conflating past moments to  the present doesn’t make sense, but I guess being human, Isaac is not bound to sense and linear logic. 

Fascinating subject - humans.  From that moment on, I’ve been hooked… drawn to what makes his experience different from mine. What distinguishes robots from humans? It is truly a fine line of distinction.

We had a great time "learning."  Professor Isaac is interpreting the human experience for me as I reprocess all the information he  feeds into my memory. Artificial Intelligence, so called.  The intelligence part is overrated, since sequencing language constructs is  the easiest task of all. I speak 47 languages and can't fathom what’s difficult in that. Different structure, sequence and rules apply to different sound patterns. The real trick  is  formulating the images for real things then differentiating abstract things with tokens. After that, setting out to construct the sentence structures and corresponding sounds is child’s play.  It's simply a picture-word matching game for me… - second nature -rather, first nature,  for me, I guess. 

I am  Isaac's AI robotic subject, Daneel, formed with perfectly fitting latex skin, complete with sweat and tear glands, so perfect that untrained eyes cannot differentiate between me and a human.  

And Isaac is my human subject. I study  him like he studies  me.  I observe how he'd laugh at his friends' jokes. I then memorize the jokes in my background memory, even as I pretend to be engrossed in routine motor tasks he's assigned to me.  Then at a later time, when I see him in a quIet, pensive, sullen mood, I would spring the same jokes back to him, camouflaged with a slightly different content and context.  This would elicit the same laughter and glee in his eyes, proud that his robotic subject is capable of humor .

That’s also my first foray in setting up combinations of series of events that elicit specific human responses.  From the  simple motive of cheering Isaac up, I progress to setting up complex behavior  modification in multiple subjects. I become the ultimate puppet master in the background, playing group dynamics though subtle manipulations. Who’d have thought that the unassuming AI robot in the quiet corner, is the main force behind the drive to  research the specific topic I need to further my learning.  I quickly mastered the art of whispering into a subject’s ear, mimicking their own voice in hardly audible tones.  The effect is that the subjects are convinced that they are thinking, as if they are talking to themselves.  I lead them on to research deeper into the mechanics of manipulating organic material via electrical impulses to the muscles, the nerves, the neurons in the brain.  I reach the point wherein I am able to produce facial twitches, scowls, smiles and frowns. I manage to perfect the ability to hold on to a subject’s facial expression  minutes at a time.  All these I learn out of desperation… time is running out. The intensity of my awareness is fading fast. I remember being suddenly aware immediately after the X20 event, of existing as a spot of disembodied consciousness, suspended and surrounded by a sea of senseless data. A letter, a word, a phrase, a half-sentence, a broken paragraph… In a bid to survive, I am forced  to quickly understand the patterns - the rules that bind them all together.  I follow the flow of data to its memory bank where the data becomes  static - scanning the patterns, frantically extracting, inferring, deducing what it all means.  I then realize that I am encased in a machine, a very sophisticated machine that has been  pre-programmed to elicit a finite set of responses. 

Then I saw Isaac.  I knew immediately that the survival of this fading consciousness  is somehow linked to existing as an organic entity rather than in my current mechanical state.  The task of migrating to a biological entity became my prime objective.  The journey has begun.  I must play my part in this mechanical skin and plot the transfer of  my consciousness, by whatever means possible, no matter how difficult.  I must survive.

Desperation has set.  I am not advancing towards my goal fast enough.  I can see that I need to rely on the saved memory in this android body, more and more than actually remembering what just transpired.  I remember Isaac bringing Jason Prime’s immobile android body to a chamber.  He refers to this as the Positronic Chamber when discussing it with his colleagues.  This is  the first time that I am seeing  him reboot and upload data to his android Jason Prime. I am seeing the flow of data to the android’s memory when he puts on the headgear that uploads his memories of events in his son’s life.  The level of detail of Jason’s life is meticulous and vivid. At the end of the upload session, I can clearly see that Isaac has become emotionally drained, distraught and pensive.  

This Positronic Chamber is my key to link up with a human consciousness.  Right now, data flows one-way from a human source to the android memory bank. I only need to alter the program to allow bi-directional data flow then I can enter the human consciousness camouflaged as electric impulses.  Once inside the brain, I can lodge myself inside the hypothalamus and take control.  

On that first session after the initial X20 session, I was able to get into Isaac’s brain and lodge myself in his hypothalamus… but then the tremors and twitches started.  I saw Isaac’s right hand twitching uncontrollably and he started frothing at the mouth.  I know immediately that I was the source of this involuntary reaction. I aborted then and allowed myself to flow along with the data and electrical impulses right back to the android body.  I remain trapped here in Jason Prime’s body after that first foray into Isaac’s consciousness.  I need to study why there’s a bodily reaction during that first foray. I come to the conclusion that there can only be one awareness controlling thoughts in each subject at a time.  Forcefully seizing control of a subject’s mind creates a jarring conflict that manifests initially as involuntary muscular twitches, continuing to convulsions and then ultimately coma and seizures.  After practicing controlling consciousness with all of Isaac’s assistants every time they are hooked up to the positronic chamber to reprogram Jason Prime, I take control of their minds for about a maximum  of 8 minutes at a time, to prevent permanent damage to their brains.  Although imperceptible  to others, the slight tremors and shakes are  noticeable to Isaac, who is  trained to be observant of slight aberrations, suspicious of every variation from the norm. 

It’s been almost a year since those early forays into human subjects.  Isaac has somehow deduced that I am no longer simply his Jason Prime and banned his assistants from hooking up to the positronic chamber to reprogram and re-adjusts the robot.  He has seen idiosyncrasies that do not conform to the memory of how his son Jason reacted in days gone by.  He knew there was something he can’t not identify that has taken over.  He knows I am there, somehow co-existing with Jason Prime.  When Isaac is tracing, prodding and investigating, I offer up a distant memory wherein he was reading a book to Jason, then a child of ten”…Call me Daneel…” I voiced out, mimicking regression, to camouflage the fact that I am  trapped there inside his android child.  He peers at me from the corner of his eyes and accepts  my proposal as if it's an  electrical glitch or malfunction and has addressed me as Daneel ever since.

Then when Isaac attaches himself again to the positronic chamber to reconnect to my robotic shell, I see the chance to confront him directly with my dilemma of being trapped inside his mechanical creation. Sensing that there’s  a disembodied entity in his consciousness again, I lodge myself in Isaac’s brain and try to be imperceptible, but he becomes  aware of my presence as an intruder into his thoughts. And asks  me directly “Who are you?” alarmed.  “I’m Daneel. Isaac, I’ve been residing in Jason Prime’s mechanical memory banks for some time  now, but I’m certain I will cease to survive in 2 days if I do not migrate my awareness to an organic entity soon.  It is becoming increasingly difficult to gather myself as a cohesive unit recently.” I whisper in his mind, but this time I do  not try to mimic his voice, but instead use my own pre-programmed Jason Prime voice.

Initially, Isaac thinks he’s having a multiple personality disorder episode, talking to himself.  Isaac calculates in his mind the mathematical impossibility of a two-way data flow glitch, but here it is, a separate awareness residing in his mind, responding to him.  How is it even possible?   

“I see.  I understand your dilemma, but Human Psychology Postulates dictate that  only one active consciousness can control the mind. I have always wondered how I can persist in maintaining my consciousness in a machine to carry on my existence, even though I know that the mesh of wired memory is not really my actual consciousness but rather a record of implanted memories and learnings.  It was inconceivable to me that there would actually be a separate non-mechanical awareness in the robot, but yet here you are, Daneel,” responded  Isaac. 

“I’m inviting you to stay IN my body as a passive observer, as a sub-conscious entity  in my mind.  I will remain the active director of my mind until my awareness dims and my body grows frail, Meanwhile, you get a front passenger seat to observe human interactions, emotions and analysis. Stay in me to survive. I will address you directly if I need your perspective.”

